Death toll from rains in southern Brazil climbs to 56

SAO PAULO, May 4 (Reuters) - The death toll from rains in Brazil's southernmost state of Rio Grande do Sul rose to 57, local authorities said on Saturday afternoon, while dozens still have not been accounted for.

Rio Grande do Sul's civil defense authority said 67 people were still missing and more than 32,000 had been displaced as storms have affected nearly two thirds of the 497 cities in the state, which borders Uruguay and Argentina.

Floods destroyed roads and bridges in several regions of the state. The storm also triggered landslides and the partial collapse of a dam at a small hydroelectric power plant. A second dam in the city of Bento Goncalves is also at risk of collapsing, authorities said.

In Porto Alegre, the capital of Rio Grande do Sul, the Guaiba lake broke its banks, flooding streets.

Porto Alegre's international airport has suspended all flights for an indefinite period.

Rains are expected in the northern and northeastern regions of the state in the next 36 hours, but the volume of precipitation has been declining, and should be well below the peak seen earlier in the week, according to the state meteorology authority.

Still, "rivers water levels should stay high for some days", Governor Eduardo Leite said on Saturday in a live video on his social media, adding it is difficult to determine for how long.

Rio Grande do Sul is at a geographical meeting point between tropical and polar atmospheres, which has created a weather pattern with periods of intense rains and others of drought.

Local scientists believe the pattern has been intensifying due to climate change.

Heavy rains had already hit Rio Grande do Sul last September, as an extratropical cyclone caused floods that killed more than 50 people.

That came after more than two years of a persistent drought due to the La Nina phenomenon, with only scarce showers.

The Reuters Daily Briefing newsletter provides all the news you need to start your day. Sign up  here.

Reporting by Andre Romani and Eduardo Simoes; Editing by Daniel Wallis


UK's new climate action plan unlawful due to delivery risk, High Court rules

By Sam Tobin

May 3, 20245:00 PM GMT-3Updated a day ago

LONDON, May 3 (Reuters) - Britain's latest climate action plan is unlawful because ministers were not told of the risk that key policies could not be delivered, London's High Court ruled on Friday, in a further challenge for Britain as it navigates the move towards net zero.

The court's judgment – that carbon budgets set by the government in 2023 to meet the UK's target of net zero emissions by 2050 were set without evidence they could be achieved – means Britain will have to submit a new plan for a second time.

Friends of the Earth, ClientEarth and the Good Law Project took legal action over the targets last year, having successfully challenged the previous budgets set by the Conservative government in 2022.

The High Court ruled then that Britain had breached legislation designed to help reach the 2015 Paris Agreement goal of keeping temperatures within 1.5 degrees Celsius of pre-industrial levels, requiring a new plan.

The three environmental groups argued the new plan was also unlawful because it was agreed based on incorrect assumptions about its viability, citing the fact that the then-energy minister, Grant Shapps, was not told of the risk that policies to reduce emissions could not eventually be delivered.

Judge Clive Sheldon upheld four out of five grounds of their legal challenge in a written ruling that Katie de Kauwe, a lawyer with Friends of the Earth, described as "another embarrassing defeat for the government and its reckless and inadequate climate plans".

In response, a spokesperson for the Department for Energy Security and Net Zero said: "The UK can be hugely proud of its record on climate change."

The spokesperson added: "The claims in this case were largely about process and the judgment contains no criticism of the detailed plans we have in place.

"We do not believe a court case about process represents the best way of driving progress towards our shared goal of reaching net zero."



Russian suspected cybercrime kingpin pleads guilty in US, TASS reports

By Reuters

May 4, 20245:22 AM GMT-3Updated 11 hours ago

Alexander Vinnik, a 38 year old Russian man suspected of running a money laundering operation using bitcoin, is escorted by police officers to a court in Athens, Greece December 13, 2017. REUTERS/Costas Baltas/File Photo Purchase Licensing Rights

MOSCOW, May 4 (Reuters) - Alexander Vinnik, a Russian suspected cybercrime kingpin who was arrested in Greece in 2017, convicted of money laundering in France three years later and is now awaiting trial in California, has pleaded partially guilty, TASS news agency cited his lawyer as saying on Saturday.

The lawyer, Arkady Bukh, said that as a result of the plea bargain he now expected Vinnik to get a prison term of less than 10 years.

"He pleaded guilty on a restricted number of charges," TASS quoted Bukh as saying, adding that Vinnik had faced life imprisonment.

"The culmination of the negotiations was a deal with the prosecutor's office. We expect that the prison term will be up to 10 years."

Vinnik, accused of laundering more than $4 billion through the digital currency bitcoin, was arrested in 2017 in Greece at the request of the United States, although Moscow has repeatedly demanded he be returned to Russia.

He was extradited to France from Greece where he was sentenced to five years in prison for money laundering before he was sent back to Greece and then on to the United States in 2022.

The U.S. Department of Justice has said Vinnik "allegedly owned, operated, and administrated BTC-e, a significant cybercrime and online money laundering entity that allowed its users to trade in bitcoin with high levels of anonymity and developed a customer base heavily reliant on criminal activity."



Argentina's Milei says Spain's Sanchez brings 'death and poverty' after drug use jibe

By Ana Cantero

May 4, 20248:06 AM GMT-3Updated 8 hours ago

Argentina's President Javier Milei speaks during a business event in Buenos Aires, Argentina, March 26, 2024. REUTERS/Agustin Marcarian/File Photo Purchase Licensing Rights

MADRID, May 4 (Reuters) - Madrid and Buenos Aires traded barbs on Saturday after Spanish Transport Minister Oscar Puente suggested Argentina's President Javier Milei was a drug user.

Puente, during a panel discussion in Salamanca on Friday, suggested Milei had ingested "substances" during last year's election campaign.

Milei's office released a statement on Saturday condemning the remarks while also attacking Spanish Prime Minister Pedro Sanchez.

It accused Sanchez of "endangering Spanish women by allowing illegal immigration" and undermining Spain's integrity by making deals with separatists, while his leftist policies brought "death and poverty".

That provoked a rebuke from the Spanish Foreign Ministry, which said the terms used in the Argentine statement "do not correspond to the relations between the two brotherly countries and peoples".

Following the election of Milei, a right-wing populist who took the helm in December, relations between Argentina and Spain, ruled by a left-wing coalition led by Sanchez's Socialist Party, have significantly cooled.

Milei has publicly supported Spain's far-right anti-immigration Vox party.



Wall St Week Ahead: US small caps struggle as elevated interest rates take a toll

By David Randall

May 3, 20243:35 PM GMT-3Updated 18 hours ago

Signage is seen at the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) in Manhattan, New York City, U.S., November 11, 2022. REUTERS/Andrew Kelly/File Photo Purchase Licensing Rights

NEW YORK, May 3 (Reuters) - The prospect of interest rates remaining elevated as the Federal Reserve battles inflation is further clouding the outlook for shares of smaller U.S. companies, which have lagged broader markets this year.

Small cap stocks surged at the end of 2023, as expectations grew that the Fed was done raising interest rates and would soon begin easing monetary policy. That would be a welcome change for smaller companies, which rely more heavily on debt financing and consumer spending.

But stubbornly strong inflation has eroded prospects of rate cuts this year, and small cap stocks have suffered as a result. The Russell 2000 is up just 0.4% year-to-date, far less than the S&P 500's 7.5% gain. Earnings are also expected to be shaky, giving investors little reason to shift allocations from larger companies and other, less risky parts of their portfolios.

"Investors are skeptical right now about small cap stocks because of higher rates and stickier inflation, and they need greater clarity that the Fed will be cutting rates this year before moving in," said Michael Arone, Chief Investment Strategist for State Street’s SPDR Business, who has been buying small caps in anticipation of rate cuts later in the year.

The case for smaller stocks may have improved over the last few days. U.S. employment data on Friday showed that jobs growth, while still relatively robust, slowed last month, easing fears that rates will remain elevated for the rest of the year. The Russell 2000 was up about 1% on the day.

On Wednesday, Fed Chairman Jerome Powell said he still believed rates were heading lower this year, despite stubborn inflation.

Futures markets on Friday showed investors pricing in around 45 basis points of interest rate cuts this year, from less than 30 priced in earlier this week. That remained far lower than the 150 points they had priced in January.

Stronger-than-expected earnings in coming weeks could help allay investor concerns. Overall, the Russell 2000 is expected to post earning growth of -8.4% over the most recent quarter, compared with a 10.2% earnings growth rate for the S&P 500, according to LSEG data. At the same, the Russell 2000 is trading at a forward price to earnings ratio of 22 compared with a 20 times earnings multiple for the S&P 500, making small-caps more expensive.

"The earnings pickup we expected has just not been there," said David Lefkowitz, CIO Head of US Equities at UBS Global Wealth Management, who has been overweight small caps since December. "I still think the preference for small makes sense, but it depends on your rate view."

Among the notable small cap companies reporting in the week ahead are nutrition company Bellring Brands (BRBR.N)

Despite the encouraging developments of the last few days, few believe the path to rate cuts is clear.

Jill Carey Hall, equity & quant strategist at Bofa Global Research, said investors buying small caps should focus on companies positioned to withstand an extended Fed pause, including those with higher percentages of fixed dent and comparatively low leverage.

"It's too soon to price in more rate cuts," said Timothy Chubb, chief investment officer at Girard. "One number doesn't make a trend. Overall, the Fed is getting the evidence it needs.”
