Rains in Rio Grande do Sul: Understanding the Causes of One of the Worst Climate Disasters in the State and Why the Situation May Worsen

Meteorologists explain that the catastrophe results from at least three phenomena in the region, exacerbated by climate changes.

By Poliana Casemiro, g1

May 2, 2024, 11:46 AM Updated a day ago

Rio Grande do Sul is experiencing one of its worst climate disasters. The rain that has persisted for at least a week has put the entire state in a calamity situation and is expected to continue in the coming days, causing further damage. The death toll has already reached 32, with dozens of people missing amid the floods.

Meteorologists explain that the catastrophe is the result of at least three phenomena affecting the region, which have been exacerbated by climate changes. And the trend is expected to worsen due to the forecast of more rain.

The situation began on April 26, when the National Institute of Meteorology (Inmet), linked to the federal government, issued a storm warning for the state. At that time, the forecast was still for rain in some regions of the state. However, the situation worsened over the days. (See the image above)

According to experts, the calamity is the effect of a combination of factors:

There was a trough, which is an intense wind current, acting over the region, making the weather unstable;
This was combined with a corridor of humidity coming from the Amazon, which increased the strength of the rain;
The scenario was worsened by an atmospheric blockage, a reflection of the heatwave, which left the center of the country dry and hot, keeping the rain concentrated on the extremes.
The region had been unstable for a few days, but the combination of these factors intensified the rain. We had several cold fronts that could not dissipate to other regions because of the atmospheric blockage, and thus, they began to affect the entire state of Rio Grande do Sul.
— Fábio Luengo, meteorologist from Climatempo.

And you might ask: what do climate changes have to do with this? The heat from the Earth and the oceans impacts the atmosphere and causes climate events to occur with greater intensity.

What the meteorologist explains is that the southern part of the country has conditions that favor storms at this time of the year, but what would be an isolated event turns into a catastrophe.

“The warmer ocean, as we are seeing now, generates more energy for rain formation. With this, they reach these levels, which we have never seen before. The change in the climate pattern interferes with the atmosphere and changes the cycle of the phenomena that occurred, making them more intense,” asserts Luengo.

Causes of Extreme Rain in RS — Photo: Ighor Jesus/Art g1

Worsening Scenario

Marcelo Seluchi, the coordinator of the monitoring team at the National Center for Monitoring and Natural Disaster Alerts (Cemaden), explains that the combination of these conditions has created the scenario for what experts project to be the highest volume of rain ever recorded in the state's history.

The forecast is that the condition will continue until Saturday (4) with accumulations that could reach up to 400 millimeters, which will add to the more than 300 millimeters of rain recorded in the last 4 days.

We are already seeing a huge accumulated amount that will increase because the rain will not stop until the weekend. It is the largest accumulation with this dimension, covering an entire state. The impacts are significant, and the trend is to worsen.
— Marcelo Seluchi, coordinator of the monitoring team at Cemaden.

Cemaden, linked to the Ministry of Science and Technology, is the agency that forecasts disasters and acts by providing information to Civil Defense and the government to adopt measures to minimize impacts. According to the agency, the alert now continues to be about the volume of rains, but also about the possibility of landslides.

According to Civil Defense, confirmed earlier this afternoon, 24 people have died, 21 remain missing, and more than 8,000 people are out of their homes due to the storms.

Atmospheric Microburst

In addition to the intense rain, which floods and saturates the soil, bringing the risk of landslides, the region may also experience an atmospheric microburst – which occurs in scenarios of strong storms. (See the illustration below.)

It is a strong air current that forms when an intense wind current detaches from the storm cloud toward the ground. The strong impact causes winds that can exceed 100 km/h.

This is another concern because the condition is prone. It happens amid intense storms and is as if the air that detaches from the cloud is a ball, which is thrown toward the ground. Having nowhere to go, it dissipates with the impact and forms intense wind gusts.
— Fábio Luengo, meteorologist
